# Resiliencia

Resiliencia es la capacidad de una organización, individuo o ecosistema de resistir y recuperarse de eventos perturbadores, ya sean amenazas naturales o provocadas por el hombre. [1] [3] La resiliencia implica no solo la capacidad de evitar o reducir los efectos negativos de estos eventos, sino también la capacidad de adaptarse a las nuevas condiciones y oportunidades que surgen después de un evento. [1] Los sistemas resilientes tienen estructuras organizativas flexibles y adaptables, una amplia gama de productos que satisfacen las necesidades de una variedad de clientes y cadenas de suministro ágiles. [1] La resiliencia es especialmente importante para las organizaciones que proporcionan servicios públicos y privados, incluyendo transporte, servicios públicos y el sector financiero. [1] La resiliencia también es importante para la comunidad en general, ya que promueve la capacidad de recuperación después de eventos perturbadores. [1] El término resiliencia se originó en la física, específicamente en la capacidad de los materiales para recuperar su forma después de ser deformados. [3] La resiliencia tiene varias características comunes, incluyendo la capacidad de hacer frente a amenazas y eventos anormales, la capacidad de adaptarse y aprender de estos eventos y la capacidad de recuperarse y mantener su estructura y funciones básicas. [4]

La resiliencia, también conocida como capacidad de recuperación, es la habilidad que tiene un individuo, organización o ecosistema de adaptarse y recuperarse ante situaciones de adversidad o crisis [1]. La resiliencia en organizaciones implica tener un personal flexible, cadenas de suministro adaptables y una variedad de productos para satisfacer diferentes necesidades de los clientes [1]. Las empresas grandes que dependen de productos heredados y clientes tradicionales no son resistentes y son las que más sufren en épocas de crisis [1]. Un evento disruptivo puede generar una emergencia, crisis o incluso un desastre que puede afectar la imagen y la reputación de una organización además de causar daño físico o ambiental, lesiones o pérdida de vidas [1]. Por lo tanto, es importante que las organizaciones de servicios públicos, transporte y financieras sean resilientes, ya que la disponibilidad de servicios esenciales durante y después de un evento disruptivo depende de su capacidad para dar frente a situaciones críticas [1]. Algunos países han desarrollado estándares y guías nacionales para la resiliencia organizacional, como el estándar Organizational Resilience: Security, Preparedness and Continuity Management Systems (ASIS SPC.1-2009) en los Estados Unidos [1]. El aumento de la resiliencia organizacional es un paso crítico hacia la creación de comunidades más resilientes [1]. El término "resili

“Drawing on terminology from ecology and sociology, resilience is defined as “the capacity of a system, enterprise, or person to maintain its core purpose and integrity in the face of dramatically changed circumstances.”” (Langeland et al., p. 5)

“In the psychological community, resilience is a quality that allows an individual to recover from adversity stronger than before.” (Langeland et al., p. 5)

“The factors that make an individual psychologically resilient are often emotional and attitude related; here the primary resilience metric is the emotional wellbeing of the individual.15 In contrast, engineers characterize a structure as resilient based on its ability to avoid failure; factors that contribute to structural resilience include physical strength and robustness or “the ability of a structure (or part of it) to withstand events (like fire, explosion, impact) or consequences of human errors, without being damaged to an extent disproportionate to the original cause.”16 In this approach to resilience, the ability to avoid structural failure is the primary metric.17 In ecological communities, the ability to adapt to new threats enables resilience of the entire community, and this flexibility is an important metric in evaluating these systems. Inverse of the engineering definition, the ability to withstand is even presented as a concept outside of resilience. Political scientist Aaron Wildavsky, a political scientist known for his pioneering work on risk management in public policy, introduces an overall strategy of coping with risk by striking a balance between anticipation and resilience.18” (Langeland et al., p. 5)

“We define resilience for the purpose of this report, then as the ability to maintain a critical level of operational capability despite disruptive events and regardless of the impact on individual systems and components.” (Langeland et al., p. 6)

“In ecological systems, flexibility is prioritized, and resilience is often characterized in ecological systems as adaptive capacity.23 In contrast, the resilience of physical, engineered systems is most often an indication of an ability to withstand physical forces without deformation, malfunction, or breaking; is measured by hardness or robustness; and requires planning for the worst-case scenario, with the understanding that design for worst-case scenarios protects against lesser forces.2” (Langeland et al., p. 6)

“In behavioral science, where people are subject to stresses that require not just resistance but adaptation and response, resilience is a term often used to describe the capability of a system or organism to bounce back following adversity, in addition to the measurement of” (Langeland et al., p. 6)

“its capacity and time to recover.” (Langeland et al., p. 7)

“Resilience is further categorized by specific versus general indicators, presenting further challenges to developing universal indicators for this concept. Specific resilience refers to the capability to maintain mission functions during and following a specific threat or other event. General resilience is a measure of the ability to maintain operations over a range of unanticipated threats and events.26” (Langeland et al., p. 7)

“A system specifically tailored to resist the impact of a power outage, for example, may be poorly designed to withstand an earthquake. The system has specific resilience, but not general resilience. Ideally, the actions taken to increase specific resilience are able to increase general resilience as well, but this is not necessarily the case. Actions taken in response to a threat event, or in anticipation of it, can result in an incrementally changing system to accommodate the threat, or any other abrupt and significant alteration in system operations. In this way, resilience can be adaptive or transformative because, despite the risks, “sudden changes are ambiguous events that also benefit organizations.”27” (Langeland et al., p. 7)

“Skill indicates the learned ability of an operator to use equipment, or the overall expertise and capabilities of a population to respond to a threat event. Diversity indicates the variability of features that may be impacted by such a threat event; if the threat specifically attacks one species, type of equipment, or physical attribute, then diversity in each of these will provide increased resilience to this threat. Hardness indicates the ability to withstand a threat event without catastrophic impact. Each of these indicators is measured using very different methods and with varying levels of subjectivity.” (Langeland et al., p. 7)

## What is resilience?

“It has been used in psychology since the 1940s and 1950s. Initially, the term was used in psychological studies that were trying to find out what makes people able to cope with personal misfortune and unpredictable hardships. The related capability to come to terms with or recover from (sudden) disruptions and crises in such a way that essential functions are maintained still constitutes the lowest common denominator of the traditional interpretations of the term resilience.” (Hanisch, 2016, p. 2)

“This included different levels of analysis (individuals, organizations, technical components as well as societies), various disciplines (engineering, ecology, economy, social and organisational sciences or security research) and different policy fields (security policy, development policy, or climate policy).” (Hanisch, 2016, p. 2)

“The first debate refers to the moment of resilience, regarding the point in time at which resilience should exist or become visible: either after or before a particular event. Approaches coming from organisational science, for example, particularly emphasize reactive coping and fast recovery following a disruption. To them, the process of bouncing back – regaining functional capacity and the ability to act – is a visible sign of resilience. However, some studies from the security sciences and on disaster and crisis management focus on preventive aspects and the anticipation of strain or changes. In this view, resilience means anticipatory adaptation, aiming to reduce the extent of one’s own vulnerabilities beforehand” (Hanisch, 2016, p. 3)

“The third controversial debate finally deals with the question of how to do define the state after coping, which is achieved through resilience.” (Hanisch, 2016, p. 3)

“When, for example, a society resumes its daily routine or “goes back to normal” after experiencing a disastrous event, as in the case of the most recent terrorist attacks in Paris and Brussels, is this sufficient to speak of resilience? And if that is the case, how exactly does one define this “normality”? At the same time, the different approaches disagree on whether resilience means that something must go back to its original state, or whether it can also move on to a new balance. What if the new state is less desirable than the previous one? What if, in response to an act of terrorism, individual liberties are limited or social cohesion crumbles? Would this condition still qualify as resilient?” (Hanisch, 2016, p. 3)

“Depending on the discipline, up to three different features are taken into consideration. Most approaches focus first on coping capacities. These include enduring and overcoming sudden disruptions reactively, rapidly, and with as much flexibility as possible” (Hanisch, 2016, p. 4)

“adaptive capacities to be important. These capacities refer to the proactive and long-term adaptation of structures, processes, or modes of behaviour to present and future vulnerabilities. This adaptation is based on lessons learned from past crisis events and on the anticipation of risks. The constant adaptation, however, does not aim to prevent crises. The goal is rather to attenuate their harmful and disruptive impact” (Hanisch, 2016, p. 4)

“transformative capacities, which mostly appear in the context of “social resilience.” These capacities differ from adaptive capacities in that societies do not adapt gradually, but undergo radical change” (Hanisch, 2016, p. 4)

“There are four hypotheses that appear to be useful in the debate surrounding the concept of resilience and its possible applications.” (Hanisch, 2016, p. 4)

“Firstly, there is not one resilience, but there are many different forms of resilience in different contexts. Speaking of resilience we must thus make clear which type we are referring to and under which circumstances. Are we, for example, “only” talking about the ability to cope quickly with an unexpected crisis or rather about adapting structures and modes of behaviour to an ever-changing and insecure environment? One must also always answer the questions of who or what ultimately needs resilience for what purpose, how this resilience should be promoted and who is to be responsible for this task. This kind of clarity is necessary to render the concept of resilience relevant to practice” (Hanisch, 2016, p. 4)

“Secondly, resilience is neither a universal strategy nor a panacea, because (more) resilience is precisely not what prevents disruptions, strain, or change from materialising, be they sudden or long-term. Instead, resilience acknowledges vulnerabilities and helps people to brace themselves for inevitable injuries – to increase their survivability – so they can better deal with a crisis by attenuating negative effects. To put it” (Hanisch, 2016, p. 4)

“resilience strongly contributes to damage control – it keeps bad situations from becoming worse.” (Hanisch, 2016, p. 5)

“Especially in the current security debate surrounding civil protection and disaster relief, care should thus be taken not to interpret resilience as “robustness” (based on the Latin resilire = rebound, recoil). For this interpretation suggests a desire to avert all influences or to permanently protect and immunise oneself against possible damage, which is simply impossible and is also not in line with the principle of resilience.” (Hanisch, 2016, p. 5)

“Thirdly, degrees of resilience can change and even decrease despite all efforts to the contrary. Depending on the intensity, frequency, or duration of shocks and strain, the individual, technological, organisational, or social capabilities to absorb such events in a flexible way will vary greatly” (Hanisch, 2016, p. 5)

“Fourthly, resilience does not mean stagnation. Even though it is not directed at the causes of events, many concepts of resilience still contain transformative approaches. For in an ever-changing, insecure environment, individuals, organsations, or societies can only “survive” if they learn to adapt to ever new and unpredictable conditions. Resilience must thus mean more than going back to a previous, “normal” state, namely to consciously perceiving change as an opportunity to evolve.” (Hanisch, 2016, p. 5)

# The concept of resilience

“Scholarly work often starts with its Latin root (resilire) then departs in a number of directions reflecting the many applications of the term.” (Mcaslan, 2010, p. 1)

“The term resilience was introduced into the English language in the early 17th Century from the Latin verb resilire, meaning to rebound or recoil (Concise Oxford Dictionary, Tenth Edition)” (Mcaslan, 2010, p. 2)

“Robert Mallet further developed this concept of resilience as a means of measuring and comparing the strength of materials used in the construction of the Royal Navy’s fighting ships.” (Mcaslan, 2010, p. 2)

“Mallet’s work is important in predicting with some confidence the suitability of using iron in different parts of “vessels in order to meet the force of the wind and sea; and how the material in the different parts should be proportioned and distributed so as to equalize their powers of resistance to the alternation of strains which the different parts undergo when the ship is afloat.” (” (Mcaslan, 2010, p. 2)

“Two decades later, Mansfield Merriman defined resilience in his Textbook on the Mechanics of Materials and of Beams, Columns and Shafts as “a measure of a material to withstand impact, for if a shock or sudden blow be produced by a falling body, its intensity depends upon the weight and the height through which it has fallen, that is, upon its kinetic energy or work. Hence the higher resilience of a material the greater its capacity to endure work that may be performed upon it. The modulus of resilience is a measure of this capacity within the elastic limits only.” (Merriman, 1885, p.200).” (Mcaslan, 2010, p. 2)

“Resilience embraces the concepts of awareness, det ection, communication, reaction (and if possible avoidance) and recovery.” (Mcaslan, 2010, p. 1)

“Some ecologists, such as Richard Klein, question a core assumption that underpins Holling’s original concept of resilience, namely that ecosystems exist in an equilibrium state to which they can return after experiencing a given level of disturbance. They argue that ecosystems are dynamic and evolve continuously in response to external influences taking place over a period of time.” (Mcaslan, 2010, p. 3)

“In a conceptual study of the resilience of the Dutch coastline, Klein et al. (1998) discuss the interrelationship between ecological, biological and socio-economic processes in determining coastal resilience. These processes produce a coastal system that is continually changing, so no original or equilibrium state exists. Moreover, the changes are not isolated events from which the coastal systems may not recover, but are ever-present and occur at different times and in different ways. The authors defined coastal resilience as “the self organising capacity of the coast to preserve actual and potential functions under constantly changing circumstances”. (Klein et al., 2004, 40)” (Mcaslan, 2010, p. 3)

“In spite of its lack of specificity, the concept of resilience is still considered useful in understanding the behaviour and improving the management of ecosystems. Academic networks and organisations such as the Resilience Alliance and the Stockholm Resilience Centre aim to advance our understanding of complex social-ecological systems and generate new insights and tools to improve the management practices and long-term sustainability of ecosystems.” (Mcaslan, 2010, p. 3)

“Mechanics of Materials defines it as “the ability of a material to absorb and release energy, within the elastic range”” (Mcaslan, 2010, p. 2)

“He compared and contrasted the concept of resilience with the notion of stability, which he defined as the ability of a system to return to its equilibrium state after a temporary disturbance; that is the more rapidly the system returns to its equilibrium, the more stable it is. He concluded that resilience and stability are two important properties of an ecological system.” (Mcaslan, 2010, p. 3)

## Wagnild

“What exactly is resilience? Most people would say it means, “to bounc e back from adversity. ” While this is true, resilience is much more than merely bouncing back, or returning to a baseline after difficulty. When I first began to study resilience in the 1980s, the word was used more often in engineering and physics than human behavior. Now it ’s become a popular way to define emotional agility, resourcefulness, and tenacity to keep going despite hardship. Over almost thirty years of research into the subject, I ’ve come to understand resilience is best defined as “the capacity each of us has for growth and positive adaptation in spite of the constant barrage of stress we all feel on a daily basis. ” Our world is a stressful place, and the ability to respond favorably to distress is essential if we are to have productive, meaningful, and satisfying lives.” (Wagnild, 2014, p. 20)

“Every day you have the opportunity to choose your response to events and circumstances.” (Wagnild, 2014, p. 28)

“Resilient people have meaningful and rich relationships with others. They enjoy life and, rather than withdraw or retreat, stay involved. Resilient people are unlikely to look back at their lives and dwell on regrets because they are able to put events in perspective. They seek forgiveness and get on with their lives.” (Wagnild, 2014, p. 246)

“Greater resilience also is associated with the ability to forgive others and to have an overall sense of well-being, life satisfaction, and coherence. Furthermore, resilience is associated with higher self-esteem and optimism.” (Wagnild, 2014, p. 246)

“One consistent finding is that resilience and depression are incompatible. When resilience is high, depression is low and vice versa. Resilient people feel anxiety, distress, and anguish. They are not inured to pain. Nor are they inoculated against stress. They may even have greater empathy for others because they, too, have suffered much. The difference is that they aren ’t defeated forever. They come back and keep trying.” (Wagnild, 2014, p. 246)

“The findings of the qualitative interview studies were intriguing because in the late 1980s, there were fewer studies that explored positive aspects of adaptation to adversity than there are today. Since the positive psychology movement, which started in the late 1990s, there has been a great increase in research that emphasizes positive factors associated with adaptation and a well-lived life. These include mindfulness, flow, optimism, flourishing, and happiness.” (Wagnild, 2014, p. 245)

“The five characteristics constituting resilience are: 1. Purpose 2. Perseverance 3. Self-reliance 4. Equanimity 5. Authenticity” (Wagnild, 2014, p. 244)

“The four pillars of resilience” (Wagnild, 2014, p. 36)

“Pillar one: Taking care of your health” (Wagnild, 2014, p. 37)

“Pillar two: Giving and seeking support from others” (Wagnild, 2014, p. 37)

“Pillar three: Balancing rest, responsibility, and recreation” (Wagnild, 2014, p. 37)

“Pillar four: Engaging fully in life” (Wagnild, 2014, p. 38)

## “A New Framework for Addressing Adverse Childhood and Community Experiences: The Building Community Resilience Model” (Ellis and Dietz, 2017, p. 86)

“THE BUILDING COMMUNITY Resilience (BCR) model is an innovative, transformative approach that will foster collaboration across child health systems, communitybased agencies, and cross-sector partners to address the root causes of toxic stress and childhood adversity, and build community resilience.” (Ellis and Dietz, 2017, p. 86)

“Hispanic children are also more likely to live in high-poverty areas (30%, 28%, and 23%, respectively).7 Poverty and household stressors, like unemployment, housing instability, and food insecurity combine to create an environment in which a child’s home, school, and community are sources of stress.8 A higher prevalence of poverty, unemployment, and food insecurity indicate higher levels of social vulnerability and lower levels of community resilience.9” (Ellis and Dietz, 2017, p. 87)

“We define community resilience as the capacity to anticipate risk, limit effects, and recover rapidly through survival, adaptability, evolution, and growth in the face of turbulent change and stress.12 In effect, resiliency is the capability to endure and thrive despite adversity. Although we cannot prevent all adverse exposures, we can reinforce social supports for vulnerable children, families, and communities so that together they may thrive. Community resilience is a measurable quality that is increasingly recognized as an important ingredient in preventing childhood adversity and building stronger communities to support child health and well-being.” (Ellis and Dietz, 2017, p. 87)

## Smart, DR. Sood

“In this pilot evaluation, a novel resiliency intervention, SMART (stress management and resiliency training) was found feasible in terms of patient acceptability and treatment adherence as part of a comprehensive treatment program for patients with major depressive disorder. The ndings show promise in improving resiliency, perceived stress, and depression, but a larger adequately powered controlled study is required to assess treatment ef cacy more accurately. It is also possible that there are some unique features of depression that will require modi cations of the SMART program to tailor it to clinical needs during a depressive episode.” (Seshadri et al., 2020, p. 9)

“The SMART program has been found to increase resiliency in stressed but not clinical patient samples. SMART emphasizes attention training and developing a core mindset to reinterpret life events. The techniques are based on intentional brief daily practices that can be adapted to daily life experiences. In contrast to conventional cognitive-behavioral therapy, the initial target with SMART is not identi cation of a negative automatic thought to challenge but a feeling of being stressed. Participants are taught to intentionally reframe or reinterpret the situation by using principles of directed attention such as "kind attention" and principles of gratitude (eg, "thankful for what’s right"), compassion (eg, "kindness to self and others"), acceptance (eg, "accept what went wrong while working to make things better"), higher meaning (eg, "what can I learn from this?"), and forgiveness (eg, "I choose to forgive to let go of my anger").” (Seshadri et al., 2020, p. 8)

“he emphasis of SMART is on maintaining a resilient mindset using active eudemonic strategies for cognitive reframing and emotional regulation.” (Seshadri et al., 2020, p. 8)

#   
Psychobiology and molecular Genetics of Resilience

“Resilience refers to a person's ability to adapt successfully to acute stress, trauma or more chronic forms of adversity.” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 1)

“A resilient individual has thus been tested by adversity1 and continues to demonstrate adaptive psychological and physiological stress responses, or \`psychobiological allostasis'2,3.” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 1)

“The study of resilience, or stress-resistance, originated in the 1970s with a group of researchers who directed their attention to the investigation of children capable of progressing through normal development despite exposure to significant adversity4. For many years research focused on identifying the psychosocial determinants of stress resistance, such as positive emotions, the capacity for self-regulation, social competence with peers and a close bond with a primary caregiver, among other factors5,6. Later studies turned to understanding the psychosocial determinants of resilience in trauma-exposed adults7,” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 1)

“Findings from recent studies suggest that genetic influences on biological responses — such as neural responses to affective stimuli, measured with brain imaging — are larger than genetic influences on complex behavioural responses10,11. Examining stress responses at multiple phenotypic levels, including not only behavioural and psychological measurements, but also measurements of neurochemical, neuroendocrine and neural systems, could thus help to delineate an integrative model of resilience11” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 1)

“Other psychosocial characteristics associated with stress resilience include a sense of purpose in life, a moral compass, spirituality and the ability to find meaning in the midst of trauma8,13,18,19.” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 2)

“In several animal models and in some human studies, resilience is associated with rapid activation of the stress response and its efficient termination24” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 3)

“Resilience is associated with the capacity to constrain stress-induced increases in CRH and cortisol through an elaborate negative feedback system, involving optimal function and balance of glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors3,24,25” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 3)

“Active coping with stress requires an individual to face their fears, and resilient individuals exhibit lower levels of denial, avoidant coping behaviour and behavioural disengagement8,1” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 2)

“Resilience has been linked to being able to perceive stressful events in less threatening ways, promoting adaptive coping strategies13; such cognitive reappraisal allows individuals to reevaluate or reframe adverse experiences in a more positive light” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 2)

“Indeed, several studies have linked the short allele of 5-HTTLPR and the Met158 allele of COMT with higher anxiety levels, vulnerability to negative mood, increased amygdala reactivity to negative stimuli and altered functional coupling between the amygdala and the cortex50,51,103,104. Furthermore, individual differences in cortico-limbic connectivity suggest that some people might have a genetic predisposition to inflexible emotion processing” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 9)

“ese results highlight the complexity of emotion regulation systems and suggest that resilience could also be associated with the ability to sustain attention to unpleasant stimuli. Perhaps this increased attention is related to a more accurate or optimistic appraisal of the perceived threats.” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 9)

“The capacity for empathy enables individuals to generate appropriate emotional responses in social contexts and might be related to social competence, which is a characteristic of resilient individuals111,112. Recent years have seen a surge of interest in the study of the so-called mirror neuron system, which comprises cortical neurons that fire similarly when an animal performs a task or observes another animal of the same species performing that task113. It is proposed that this system, acting in conjunction with limbic brain regions, has a central role in understanding others' emotions and intentions112.” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 10)

“The role of oxytocin in promoting social attachment in humans has recently received increased attention. A study in healthy men participating in a laboratory-based economic trust game showed that intranasal administration of oxytocin increased trust, and suggested involvement of the amygdala116. Imaging studies have demonstrated that mutual cooperation induces activation in reward circuitry regions, which are modulated by oxytocin and vasopressin117.” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 10)

“social competence and openness to social support are core characteristics of resilient individuals, and these qualities might help to modulate central responses to stress in these individuals. The effects of social contact on neural responses to threat, and the potential involvement of neuropeptides that promote social attachment, warrants direct investigation in resilient individuals.” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 10)

“Other forms of therapy can promote meaning making and help to preserve a person's sense of purpose in the face of trauma125. Interventions early in development are likely to maximize stress resistance.” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 11)

“Social competence and openness to social support promote resilience in children and adults5,13. Mutual cooperation is associated with activation of brain reward circuits. Oxytocin enhances the reward value of social attachments and reduces fear responses. Future research might identify potential differences in these measures in resilient individuals.” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 12)

[Annotations (4/28/2023, 2:31:43 AM)](zotero://note/u/J7YLJE8A/)

“The functional capacity of the brain structures that are involved in the integrated circuits that mediate mood and emotion determines stress resilience, and is in turn reflected in an individual's psychological make-up” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 11)

“resilience is an active process, not just the absence of pathology, and it can be promoted by enhancing protective factors” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 11)

“Studies have shown that certain forms of psychotherapy can enhance psychological attributes associated with resilience. For example, cognitive behavioural therapy can enhance optimism and facilitate reappraisal of traumatic events in a more positive light” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 11)

“Cognitive reappraisal, positive reframing and acceptance Cognitive reappraisal involves reinterpreting the meaning of negative stimuli, with a resulting reduction in emotional responses. Resilient individuals might be better at reappraisal or might use reappraisal more frequently. Neurobiological mechanisms that underlie some of these processes include memory suppression, memory consolidation and cognitive control of emotion106,107” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 11)

“Resilience factors During development a range of factors are potentially protective, as identified in studies of children. These include a close relationship with a caring adult, social competence and agreeableness, positive emotionality and the capacity for self-regulation135–137. In particular, studies have shown that proximity to the caregiver is an important modulator of a child's sense of safety when facing trauma, as recognized in the theory of attachment122,123. Rodent studies have shown that high levels of licking, grooming and arched-back nursing produce offspring that are less fearful as adults and that show attenuated hormonal responses to stress66. Cross-fostering experiments have demonstrated that these effects are transmitted behaviourally, and recent research has suggested an epigenetic basis for this phenomenon (see main text)66,138. It is also likely that exposure to manageable stressors during development is associated with more adaptive coping with stress during adulthood139. In studies of squirrel monkeys and rodents, early exposure to manageable stressors (\`stress inoculation') was found to be associated with reduced behavioural and hormonal responses to stress later in life65,140. Adaptive responses seem to be associated with the degree of behavioural control an animal has over stress141. Finally, the theory of predictive adaptive responses posits that early life experience can programme a certain set of responses that may be adaptive given a particular early environment, but that may prove maladaptive later on if there is a mismatch between this” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 12)

“set of responses and the environment in adulthood142. In a recent rodent study, the adult offspring of low- as opposed to high-licking and grooming mothers demonstrated greater experience-dependent structural plasticity and learning under some contexts, but lesser structural and behavioural plasticity in other contexts143.” (Feder et al., 2009, p. 13)

# Alagona

“Psychologists define resilience as an ability to cope with adversity.” (Alagona, 2014, p. 3)

“Resilience can be expressed by individuals or communities that have experienced trauma or are at high risk for distress. Social cohesion, self-confidence, and positive personal, family, or community narratives can all contribute to resilience.” (Alagona, 2014, p. 3)

“Yet these narratives need not incorporate the best or most up-to-date ideas. Communities of likeminded people might adopt dubious ideas to enforce solidarity, shield criticism, or insulate themselves from information that might destabilize their narratives or ideologies. Even false beliefs can enable people to deal with fear or adversity, at least in the short term, through weak coping mechanisms such as denial.” (Alagona, 2014, p. 3)

“Economists also talk about resilience, often in the context of national economies, which can remain relatively buffered during downturns if they are diversified, have flexible and well-trained labor forces, or some other combination of factors” (Alagona, 2014, p. 3)

“Science studies offers yet another perspective on the resilience of ideas. One of the field’s basic premises is that veracity of a claim is not what makes it stick. Ideas gain currency not because they are true or false, but rather because individuals and institutions adopt and mobilize them in ways that give them purchase and power. Science studies scholars tend to distrust progressive models of knowledge production, instead embracing more complex, contingent, and even cyclical narrative trajectories. A classic example is the recent resurgence of Lamarckian thinking in biology, after many decades during which students” (Alagona, 2014, p. 3)

“learned about the inheritance of acquired characteristics only as a foil in the larger story of the triumph of Darwinian natural selection. From a science studies perspective ideas will come and go, then come and go again, under different intellectual or technological guises but often revisiting the same fundamental debates.” (Alagona, 2014, p. 4)

“It is clear that ideas can have resilience and that this resilience is not necessarily related to their accuracy or reliability. For some scholars who still believe in some notion of transcendent truth, or at least consensual validity, this might seem a cause for despair.” (Alagona, 2014, p. 4)

# The Neuroscience of Resilience

“In humans and in animal models, chronic stress and stress-related disorders such as depression and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) are associated with changes in brain structure and function that seem to recover to some extent with treatment or after a stress-free period (Bremner, Elzinga, Schmahl, & Vermetten, 2008; Gray, Rubin, Hunter, & McEwen, 2014; Sheline, Gado, & Kraemer, 2003; Warner-Schmidt & Duman, 2006).” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 307)

“; resilience itself may reflect a dynamic response to a stressful environment rather than an ability to remain rigid and unchanged by environmental insults, or a simple absence of vulnerability (Gray et al., 2014; Horn, Charney, & Feder, 2016; Hunter, Gagnidze, McEwen, & Pfaff, 2015; Hunter & McE” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 307) note link: "zotero://note/u/52MU58HR/"

“We define resilience as the ability to achieve a successful outcome in the face of adversity (Karatsoreos & McEwen, 2011, 2013a, 2013b, 2014; McEwen, Gray, & Nasca, 2015). Although the exact definition of resilience is still subject to debate, this definition is the most commonly used in the neurosciences and is inclusive of most working definitions used in the field (Horn et al., 2016; Mancini & Bonanno, 2009; Russo, Murrough, Han, Charney, & Nestler, 2012; Southwick, Bonanno, Masten, Panter-Brick, & Yehuda, 2014; Yehuda, Flory, Southwick, & Charney, 2006). In the context of human health, what does resilience mean for prevention and treatment resulting from adversity? In the spirit of integrative medicine, it is important to let what Cannon referred to as the “wisdom of the body” prevail and to focus on strategies that center around the use of targeted behavioral therapies, along with treatments—including pharmaceutical agents—that open up “windows of plasticity” in the brain and facilitate the efficacy of behavioral interventions that change the trajectory of an individual’s life (Cannon, 1932, p. 17183; Karatsoreos & McEwen, 2013a; McEwen, 2012). This type of approach is important because a major challenge throughout the life course is to find ways of redirecting future behavior and physiology in more positive and healthy directions (Halfon et al., 2014). Such “reversibility” is a redirection of those features of a species that can be modified by experiences (Karatsoreos & McEwen, 2011, 2013a). This means that although resilience may appear to be a return to normal behavior after a trauma, it is, in fact, an active process that involves using a person’s (or animal’s) adaptive capacity to achieve a positive outcome. Resilience, in other words, has a cost, and resilient individuals are changed by their experience, even if those changes are not immediately visible to an outside observer.” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 307) note link: "zotero://note/u/Y73QS63L/"

“In the context of human health, what does resilience mean for prevention and treatment resulting from adversity? In the spirit of integrative medicine, it is important to let what Cannon referred to as the “wisdom of the body” prevail and to focus on strategies that center around the use of targeted behavioral therapies, along with treatments—including pharmaceutical agents—that open up “windows of plasticity” in the brain and facilitate the efficacy of behavioral interventions that change the trajectory of an individual’s life (Cannon, 1932, p. 17183; Karatsoreos & McEwen, 2013a; McEwen, 2012).” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 307)

“although resilience may appear to be a return to normal behavior after a trauma, it is, in fact, an active process that involves using a person’s (or animal’s) adaptive capacity to achieve a positive outcome” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 307)

“Resilience, in other words, has a cost, and resilient individuals are changed by their experience, even if those changes are not immediately visible to an outside observer.” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 307)

“This suggests that resilience or susceptibility is governed to some extent by accumulation of risk—an implication of the adverse childhood experiences (ACE) literature, which uses the “ACE score” to describe the number of different types of adversities to which a child has been exposed (Anda et al., 2010; Felitti et al., 1998; Jaffee, Caspi, Moffitt, Polo-Tomas, & Taylor, 2007; Nurius, Green, Logan-Greene, & Borja, 2015; Nurius, Prince, & Rocha, 2015)” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 308)

“Thus, the more exposures to risk factors a population has, the lower the resilience, and the more protective factors that are present, the higher the level of resilience.” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 308)

“Thus, the more exposures to risk factors a population has, the lower the resilience, and the more protective factors that are present, the higher the level of resilience.” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 308)

“The discrepancy in levels of observed resilience across studies may result from differences in the costs of adaptation.” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 308)

“Toxic stress refers to levels of stress that produce maladaptation and pathology; toxic stress is typically uncontrollable, severe, and/or chronic in nature” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 308)

“oxic stress refers to levels of stress that produce maladaptation and pathology; toxic stress is typically uncontrollable, severe, and/or chronic in nature.” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 308)

“Eustress or “good” stress refers to varieties of stress that produce adaptive outcomes. Eustressful experiences are controllable stressors that increase our capacity to adapt to future stressors; for example, the stress of military boot camp is designed to increase resilience to the stress and trauma of combat and it could be viewed as eustress or at least a tolerable stress.” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 308)

“Eustress or “good” stress refers to varieties of stress that produce adaptive outcomes. Eustressful experiences are controllable stressors that increase our capacity to adapt to future stressors; for example, the stress of military boot camp is designed to increase resilience to the stress and trauma of combat and it could be viewed as eustress or at least a tolerable stress. I” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 308)

“In between are tolerable stressors, to which an individual is adapted enough to not develop pathology, but which produce no beneficial adaptations (McEwen & McEwen, 2016” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 308)

“between are tolerable stressors, to which an individual is adapted enough to not develop pathology, but which produce no beneficial adaptations (McEwen & McEwen, 2016).” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 308)

“the concept of allostasis, or adaptation through change, which was developed as an addition to Walter Cannon’s concept of homeostasis (Cannon, 1929)” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 308)

“omeostasis provides a conceptual framework to understand how the body maintains vital aspects of physiology, such as blood pressure or body temperature, which must be maintained within a certain range to maintain 308 Journal of the Society for Social Work & Research Summer 201” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 308)

“life.” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 309)

“Allostasis, in contrast, represents changes that do not threaten life in the short term and that often occur to protect the system from perceived or genuine threats to homeostasis” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 309)

“Allostatic load represents the net pressure on the organism to change in response to challenging life events; it includes both adaptive behaviors and external supports as well as the negative pressures often conceptualized as stress. Allostatic overload represents states where the allostatic load exceeds the capacity to adapt without damage or pathology, and it thus represents states where toxic stressors can produce pathology (Korte, Koolhaas, Wingfield, & McEwen, 2005; McEwen & Wingfield, 2003). The concept of allostasis emphasizes the adaptive nature of the stress response as well as the costs of adaptation” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 309)

“Allostatic load represents the net pressure on the organism to change in response to challenging life events; it includes both adaptive behaviors and external supports as well as the negative pressures often conceptualized as stress” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 309)

“Allostatic overload represents states where the allostatic load exceeds the capacity to adapt without damage or pathology, and it thus represents states where toxic stressors can produce pathology (Korte, Koolhaas, Wingfield, & McEwen, 2005; McEwen & Wingfield, 2003).” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 309)

“The concept of allostasis emphasizes the adaptive nature of the stress response as well as the costs of adaptation.” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 309)

“The allostatic framework fits well with our emerging understanding of epigeneticsthe transmission of biological information by means other than the coding sequence of DNA itself” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 309)

“Indeed, mindfulness-based stress reduction and meditation increase functional connectivity within the brain and benefit fluid intelligence as well as improving function in aging (Gard, Holzel, & Lazar, 2014; Gard, Taquet, et al., 2014).” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 310)

“Therefore, recovery of stress-induced changes in neural architecture after stress is not a “reversal” but a form of neuroplastic adaptation that may be impaired in mood disorders and reduced with aging. Resilience may be thought of as an active process that implies ongoing adaptive plasticity without external intervention (Russo et al., 2012).” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 310)

“The hippocampus is a region of the brain important for spatial learning and memor” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 312)

“As these results suggest, the hippocampus is also one of the brain regions most sensitive to stress in both humans and animals, and a loss of hippocampal volume is associated with risk for brain disorders such as PTSD. Further, chronic stress reduces hippocampal function, leading to memory impairments and placing additional burdens on the stressed individual (McEwen, Bowles, et al., 2015; McEwen, Nasca, & Gray, 2016).” (Hunter et al., 2018, p. 312)

# Resilience: The Science of Mastering Life’s Greatest Challenges

“In the physical sciences, materials and objects are termed resilient if they resume their original shape upon being bent or stretched. In people, resilience refers to the ability to “bounce back” after encountering difficulty.” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 8) note link: "zotero://note/u/YFDEL9CB/"

“The American Psychological Association defines it as “the process of adapting well in the face of adversity, trauma, tragedy, threats and even significant sources of stress – such as family and relationship problems, serious health problems, or workplace and financial stresses.”1” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 8)

“In his book Aging Well, Harvard University psychologist George Vaillant (2002) describes resilient individuals as resembling “a twig with a fresh, green living core. When twisted out of shape, such a twig bends, but it does not break; instead, it springs back and continues growing” (p. 285).” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 8)

“Resilience is complex, multidimensional and dynamic in nature (Bonanno, 2004, 2005; Carver, 1998; Layne et al., 2007; Luthar et al., 2000; Rutter, 1985)” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 8)

“While experts define resilience in a variety of ways (Southwick et al., 2014), a common thread in their definitions is the ability to weather adversity” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 8)

“This does not mean being impervious to adversity – a resilient person may be deeply affected by a traumatic event, and may experience psychological symptoms such as depression, recurrent intrusive memories, or hypervigilance – but it does mean being able to carry on with the important facets of one’s life in spite of painful and distressing symptoms or even full-blown PTSD. In some definitions, resilience also entails the ability to grow from adverse events and find meaning in them.” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 8)

“Researchers have developed various tests to measure resilience; among them are the Connor–Davidson Resilience Scale (Connor & Davidson, 2003) and the Response to Stressful Experiences Scale (Johnson et al., 2008).” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 9)

“By conducting a detailed analysis of the interviews, we identified ten coping mechanisms that proved to be effective for dealing with stress and trauma. Throughout the book, we refer to these coping mechanisms as “resilience factors” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 15)

“In response to stress, all of the individuals we interviewed confronted their fears, maintained an optimistic but realistic outlook, sought and accepted social support, and imitated sturdy role models. Most also relied upon their own inner moral compass, turned to religious or spiritual practices, and found a way to accept that which they could not change. Many attended to their health and well-being, and trained intensively to stay physically fit, mentally sharp, and emotionally strong. And most were active problem solvers who looked for meaning and opportunity in the midst of adversity and sometimes even found humor in the darkness. Finally, all of the resilient people we interviewed accepted, to an impressive degree, responsibility for their own emotional well-being, and many used their traumatic experiences as a platform for personal growth.” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 15)

““resilience factors” (i.e. realistic optimism, facing fear, moral compass, religion and spirituality,” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 15)

“social support, resilient role models, physical fitness, brain fitness, cognitive and emotional flexibility, and meaning and purpose” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 16)

“Since resilience is fundamentally related to the experience and management of stress, throughout this book we refer to various parts of the brain, the nervous system, and the endocrine system: critical components of the stress response. We will discuss the following key brain regions: • The amygdala, which is associated with fear and alarm; it plays a central role in fear conditioning and in triggering raw emotions and the “fight or flight” response. • The prefrontal cortex, which is often referred to as the brain’s “executive center,” facilitates planning and rational decision-making; it helps to” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 19) note link: "zotero://note/u/QTFTL3LN/"

“also temporarily bolsters the immune system. produces energy by converting food into fat and glucose (a form of sugar). It • Cortisol is a stress hormone released through activation of the HPA axis. It (McEwen, 2007; Southwick et al., 2008): neurotransmitters that are involved in the stress response and resilience Throughout the book we will also refer to various hormones and the adrenal glands. a complex set of reactions involving the hypothalamus, the pituitary gland, and hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis (HPA axis), which responds to stress with baseline rapidly after the stressful event is over. Another major system is the have a robust response to stress and challenge, but also for the SNS to return to nonstressful conditions. For healthy functioning, it is beneficial for the SNS to (PNS), which conserves resources and maintains functioning under normal the body under conditions of stress; and the parasympathetic nervous system composed of two parts: the sympathetic nervous system (SNS), which mobilizes the body that respond to stress. One is the autonomic nervous system, which is In addition to these brain regions, there are several other major systems in hand for referring to this area of the brain. technically neither a system nor a structure, the term provides a useful shortand a number of other structures and regions. Although the limbic system is emotion, memory, and other functions. It includes the amygdala, hippocampus, portion of the brain – located beneath the cortex – which is involved in We occasionally also mention the limbic system. This term refers to the inner associated with the pleasurable effects of food, sex, and drug abuse. tegmental area, it mediates the experience of reward and punishment, and is central role in the brain’s reward circuitry; in association with the ventral • The nucleus accumbens, sometimes referred to as the “pleasure center,” plays a ness of the body’s internal physical state. involved in functions related to emotions, and aids in the brain’s awarethat marks the boundary between the frontal and temporal lobes; it is • The anterior insula, which is located in the fold of the cerebral cortex amygdala. regulate emotions; it is connected both to the prefrontal cortex and the assess the importance of emotional and motivational information, and ability to focus attention, detect and monitor errors and conflicts, • The anterior cingulate cortex, which plays an important role in our structures, it is vulnerable to the effects of chronic stress. ories, and regulating the stress response; more so than many other brain • The hippocampus, which plays a critical role in learning, forming new memcenter”) in check. regulate emotions and acts to keep the amygdala (the “fear and alarm” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 20) note link: "zotero://note/u/YJDCNEU9/"

“• Epinephrine, also known as adrenaline, is part of the SNS. It is released by the adrenal glands under conditions of stress and accelerates heart rate, constricts blood vessels and dilates air passages as part of the SNS fight-or-flight response. • Norepinephrine, also known as noradrenaline, is also part of the SNS. It facilitates alerting and alarm reactions in the brain and is critical for responding to danger and for remembering emotional and fearful events. • Serotonin is involved in the regulation of mood, as well as sleep, appetite, and other functions. • Dopamine is associated with pleasurable feelings and plays a key role in the reward systems of the brain. For this reason, it is an important factor in cravings and addictive behaviors. • Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is associated with decreasing anxiety and hastening return to baseline after the nervous system reacts to stress. • Oxytocin is associated with maternal behaviors, pair bonding, social communication, trust, social support, and anxiety reduction. • Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) acts to support the nervous system through the repair of existing neurons and growth of new ones.” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 21)

“They found that genes and environmental events each contributed to resilience; in fact, the magnitude of their respective contributions was approximately equal. “Roughly half of the contribution of variation in the latent level of resilience could be accounted for by [events and actions taken by the individual] that had an enduring effect” (p. 278). In addition, mildly stressful experiences (“certain doses of stress” [p. 279]) can have the effect of building resilience, similar to how physical exercise builds muscle.” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 21)

[image]  
(Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 24) note link: "zotero://note/u/RMVU4JUP/"

“Another line of research involves mindfulness-based stress reduction, a practice related to the mindfulness meditation that is part of some traditional Eastern religions. Omar Singleton and colleagues (2014) used magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to examine the brains of volunteers before and after an eight-week program of mindfulness-based stress reduction, “defined as the nonjudgmental awareness of experiences in the present moment” (p. 1). They found an increase in the size of certain brain regions that produce neurotransmitters such as serotonin and norepinephrine; these are critically involved in regulating arousal, attention, mood, reward, and learning. In addition, the volunteers scored higher on an assessment of psychological well-being after the eight-week program.” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 25)

“Resilience is common (Masten, 2001). It can be witnessed all around us, and for most people it can be enhanced through learning and training.” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 25)

“Epictetus at the Hanoi Hilton” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 86)

“...a Stoic always keeps separate files in his mind for (A) those things that are “up to him” and (B) those things that are “not up to him.” Another way of saying it is (A) those things that are “within his power” and (B) those things that are “beyond his power.” Still another way of saying it is (A) those things that are within the grasp of “his Will, his Free Will” and (B) those things that are beyond it...In short, what the Stoics say is “Work with what you have control of and you’ll have your hands full.” (Stockdale, 1995, p. 190)” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 89)

“Werner observed that resilient children – the ones who grew up to be productive, emotionally healthy adults – found at least one person who truly supported them and served as an admired role model (Werner, 1993; Werner & Smith, 1992).” (Southwick and Charney, 2018, p. 158)

### Notas resiliencia

La resiliencia se define como la capacidad de lograr un resultado exitoso frente a la adversidad y es un proceso activo que implica el uso de la capacidad adaptativa de un individuo para lograr un resultado positivo [1]. Es importante centrarse en estrategias que se centran en terapias conductuales enfocadas y en tratamientos farmacológicos que abren ventanas de plasticidad en el cerebro para facilitar la eficacia de las intervenciones conductuales que cambian la trayectoria de la vida de una persona [1]. Además, la resiliencia está influenciada por la acumulación de riesgo y la presencia de factores protectores [2]. Las dinámicas familiares entre cuidadores y niños contribuyen a la resiliencia y susceptibilidad a lo largo de la vida [3]. Factores como una perspectiva positiva, capacidad reguladora emocional, apoyo social y estrategias de afrontamiento adaptativas están asociadas con una mayor resiliencia [4]. Reducir la exposición al estrés temprano, aumentar el apoyo social y proporcionar herramientas para mejorar el afrontamiento del estrés son formas de aumentar la resiliencia [5]. La resiliencia tiene correlatos neurobiológicos en áreas como el hipocampo y la corteza prefrontal que son clave para la cognición compleja, la socialidad y el afrontamiento exitoso [5]. En resumen, la resiliencia es un proceso activo y complejo influenciado por factores biopsicosociales que pueden ser mejorados a través de intervenciones y estrategias específicas para aumentar la capacidad de adaptación de un individuo.

Resiliencia y role models:

La relación entre la resiliencia y los modelos a seguir se puede entender desde varios puntos de vista en el ámbito de la filosofía y ética. La resiliencia puede ser comprendida como la capacidad de un individuo para enfrentar, adaptarse y superar situaciones adversas o difíciles, mientras que los modelos a seguir representan figuras paradigmáticas en la adopción de valores morales y éticos que pueden servir como guías para enfrentar y superar dichas situaciones [1],[2].

Los modelos a seguir pueden promover la resiliencia moral en los individuos cuando exhiben comportamientos que demuestran capacidad para hacer frente a dificultades y/o situaciones complicadas. Estos individuos sirven como referentes, mostrando cómo es posible lidiar con problemas y mantener un enfoque ético y moral en sus acciones [7]. Es importante destacar que existen diferentes estrategias para construir la resiliencia dependiendo de distintos factores, como personalidad, cultura y entorno, lo que indica la posibilidad de personalizar la resiliencia [7].

La búsqueda de modelos a seguir contribuye a la construcción de resiliencia, en tanto estos individuos brindan apoyo emocional, cognitivo y conductual, permitiendo a quienes les siguen la posibilidad de aprender y adoptar estrategias frente a la adversidad [12]. Por otra parte, la participación en comunidades o entornos sociales en los cuales se ofrece apoyo mutuo, también incide en el desarrollo de la resiliencia, al facilitar la conexión con otros y brindar un sentido de pertenencia más amplio, lo cual puede ser beneficioso durante momentos difíciles [13], [14].

En resumen, la relación entre la resiliencia y los modelos a seguir radica en la capacidad de las figuras paradigmáticas de inspirar, guiar y motivar a otros a enfrentar adversidades y desarrollar en sí mismos una serie de habilidades, actitudes y valores que favorezcan su capacidad de superación, adaptación y crecimiento moral y ético.

Los modelos a seguir son importantes para la resiliencia porque pueden servir como fuentes de inspiración y aprendizaje en el proceso de enfrentar y superar adversidades. Cuando observamos a personas que admiramos lidiando eficazmente con situaciones difíciles, somos más propensos a adoptar las estrategias y comportamientos que ellas emplean en nuestra propia vida.

Los modelos a seguir pueden proporcionarnos ejemplos concretos de cómo enfrentar y superar problemas, lo que nos permite desarrollar nuestra propia resiliencia. Al aprender de sus experiencias y personalidades, podemos adquirir habilidades y herramientas que nos ayuden a enfrentar situaciones similares.

Además, el simple hecho de tener a alguien a quien admirar, especialmente en momentos difíciles, puede aumentar nuestra motivación e impulsarnos a superar obstáculos. Los modelos a seguir tienen la capacidad de transmitir optimismo, perse-verancia y valentía, fomentando un enfoque positivo frente a la adversidad.

Los modelos a seguir también pueden brindarnos apoyo social y emocional, ya sea directamente, a través de sus consejos o enseñanzas, o indirectamente, al ser conscientes de sus historias de vida y experiencias personales. Este tipo de apoyo es esencial para el desarrollo de la resiliencia y para afrontar situaciones difíciles con una actitud más positiva y empoderada.

En resumen, los modelos a seguir son importantes para la resiliencia porque nos ofrecen ejemplos inspiradores de cómo enfrentar y superar adversidades, fortalecen nuestra motivación y actitud frente a las dificultades, y nos brindan apoyo social y emocional. Al aprender de sus experiencias y seguir sus ejemplos, podemos mejorar nuestra capacidad para adaptarnos y superar situaciones difíciles en nuestra propia vida.

“Look for role models Don't be afraid to ask people how they cope with their difÆculties and setbacks and still manage to achieve their goals (but don't act as an interrogator attempting to extract every last ounce of useful information from them). They can act as resilience role models. For example, you might admire someone at work who consistently meets all of her deadlines, a salesman who never gets demoralized over hearing the word \`no' when he makes a sales pitch or a relative who doesn't stay down for long whatever life throws at her. In my experience, people are usually only too willing to give you their philosophy of life. So don't stand on good manners, seek out this valuable information.” (Neenan, p. 183) ?

La resiliencia se puede definir como una combinación de mecanismo, función y serie de sucesos. En términos de función, se refiere a la capacidad de adaptarse, enfrentar y recuperarse de interrupciones repentinas, crisis o vulnerabilidades, manteniendo funciones esenciales durante esos eventos [1][3]. Como mecanismo, incluye componentes de afrontamiento reactivo, donde la recuperación rápida y la restauración de la capacidad funcional después de una interrupción son esenciales [5]. Además, las capacidades adaptativas son importantes, ya que implican la adaptación proactiva y a largo plazo de estructuras, procesos o modos de comportamiento a vulnerabilidades presentes y futuras, basadas en lecciones aprendidas y anticipación de riesgos [3]. Como serie de sucesos, la resiliencia aborda la adaptación continua con el objetivo de reducir el impacto perjudicial y perturbador en lugar de prevenir las crisis en sí [3].

La resiliencia ha sido aplicada en diferentes niveles de análisis, disciplinas y contextos a lo largo del tiempo. Algunas de las disciplinas que han empleado el término de resiliencia incluyen la ingeniería, ecología, economía, ciencias sociales, organizacionales y de investigación en seguridad [2]. Estas disciplinas han aplicado el concepto en contextos como la política de seguridad, la política de desarrollo y la política climática [2].

En la ingeniería, por ejemplo, la resiliencia puede referirse a la capacidad de un sistema o componente técnico para recuperarse de disturbios o fallas. En la ecología, puede referirse a la capacidad de un ecosistema para adaptarse y recuperarse de eventos ambientales extremos. En términos de política de seguridad, la resiliencia puede referirse a la capacidad de una sociedad para enfrentar y recuperarse de ataques terroristas u otros eventos violentos [2].

En el ámbito del manejo de desastres y crisis, la resiliencia se enfoca en la capacidad de adaptación proactiva y a largo plazo a las vulnerabilidades presentes y futuras, basada en las lecciones aprendidas de eventos pasados y la anticipación de riesgos [3]. Un ejemplo de esto podría ser enfatizar el papel y la responsabilidad de los ciudadanos y el sector privado en la gestión de crisis, promoviendo la participación ciudadana y la capacidad de autoayuda, especialmente a nivel local [3].

Cabe mencionar que, aunque el término resiliencia se ha utilizado ampliamente, su crecimiento y difusión ha causado cierta confusión y desacuerdo en cuanto a su definición exacta y su traducción en la práctica [4]. Se han identificado al menos tres controversias en la interpretación de la resiliencia, relacionadas con el momento de la resiliencia, el enfoque en la adaptación reactiva o proactiva y el objetivo de la resiliencia [5]. (Hanisch, 2016, p. 2)

### Definicion en terminos conceptuales

En términos conceptuales y desde una perspectiva filosófica, la resiliencia puede describirse como una cualidad o capacidad inherente en individuos, organizaciones y sociedades para afrontar y adaptarse a desafíos, interrupciones y crisis de manera efectiva [1]. La resiliencia abarca tanto componentes reactivos, como la capacidad de recuperarse rápidamente después de una interrupción y restablecer la capacidad funcional [5], como componentes adaptativos, que se refieren a la adaptación proactiva y a largo plazo ante vulnerabilidades presentes y futuras, basada en lecciones aprendidas y en la anticipación de riesgos [3]. En este sentido, la resiliencia podría considerarse como una propiedad emergente, es decir, una cualidad que surge de la interacción, cooperación y adaptación de los elementos individuales dentro de un sistema más amplio. Así, la resiliencia se convierte en un atributo esencial para enfrentar y gestionar la incertidumbre y el cambio en un mundo en constante evolución.

En términos conceptuales y desde una perspectiva filosófica, la resiliencia puede describirse como una cualidad o capacidad inherente en individuos, organizaciones y sociedades para afrontar y adaptarse a desafíos, interrupciones y crisis de manera efectiva [1]. La resiliencia abarca tanto componentes reactivos, como la capacidad de recuperarse rápidamente después de una interrupción y restablecer la capacidad funcional [5], como componentes adaptativos, que se refieren a la adaptación proactiva y a largo plazo ante vulnerabilidades presentes y futuras, basada en lecciones aprendidas y en la anticipación de riesgos [3]. En este sentido, la resiliencia podría considerarse como una propiedad emergente, es decir, una cualidad que surge de la interacción, cooperación y adaptación de los elementos individuales dentro de un sistema más amplio. Así, la resiliencia se convierte en un atributo esencial para enfrentar y gestionar la incertidumbre y el cambio en un mundo en constante evolución.

En términos conceptuales y desde una perspectiva filosófica, la resiliencia puede describirse como una cualidad o capacidad inherente en individuos, organizaciones y sociedades para afrontar y adaptarse a desafíos, interrupciones y crisis de manera efectiva [1]. La resiliencia abarca tanto componentes reactivos, como la capacidad de recuperarse rápidamente después de una interrupción y restablecer la capacidad funcional [5], como componentes adaptativos, que se refieren a la adaptación proactiva y a largo plazo ante vulnerabilidades presentes y futuras, basada en lecciones aprendidas y en la anticipación de riesgos [3]. En este sentido, la resiliencia podría considerarse como una propiedad emergente, es decir, una cualidad que surge de la interacción, cooperación y adaptación de los elementos individuales dentro de un sistema más amplio. Así, la resiliencia se convierte en un atributo esencial para enfrentar y gestionar la incertidumbre y el cambio en un mundo en constante evolución.

En términos conceptuales y desde una perspectiva filosófica, la resiliencia puede describirse como una cualidad o capacidad inherente en individuos, organizaciones y sociedades para afrontar y adaptarse a desafíos, interrupciones y crisis de manera efectiva [1]. La resiliencia abarca tanto componentes reactivos, como la capacidad de recuperarse rápidamente después de una interrupción y restablecer la capacidad funcional [5], como componentes adaptativos, que se refieren a la adaptación proactiva y a largo plazo ante vulnerabilidades presentes y futuras, basada en lecciones aprendidas y en la anticipación de riesgos [3]. En este sentido, la resiliencia podría considerarse como una propiedad emergente, es decir, una cualidad que surge de la interacción, cooperación y adaptación de los elementos individuales dentro de un sistema más amplio. Así, la resiliencia se convierte en un atributo esencial para enfrentar y gestionar la incertidumbre y el cambio en un mundo en constante evolución.

En términos conceptuales y desde una perspectiva filosófica, la resiliencia puede describirse como una cualidad o capacidad inherente en individuos, organizaciones y sociedades para afrontar y adaptarse a desafíos, interrupciones y crisis de manera efectiva [1]. La resiliencia abarca tanto componentes reactivos, como la capacidad de recuperarse rápidamente después de una interrupción y restablecer la capacidad funcional [5], como componentes adaptativos, que se refieren a la adaptación proactiva y a largo plazo ante vulnerabilidades presentes y futuras, basada en lecciones aprendidas y en la anticipación de riesgos [3]. En este sentido, la resiliencia podría considerarse como una propiedad emergente, es decir, una cualidad que surge de la interacción, cooperación y adaptación de los elementos individuales dentro de un sistema más amplio. Así, la resiliencia se convierte en un atributo esencial para enfrentar y gestionar la incertidumbre y el cambio en un mundo en constante evolución.